If there were a competition for
the most useful distribution, that's over.
The normal distribution
won it in a landslide.
However, we could have a pretty
active discussion about what
deserves second place.
The Poisson distribution would
certainly be in the running.
At any rate, the Poisson distribution
is used to model counts.
The Poisson mask function is lambda
to the x, e to the negative lambda,
all over x factorial where x is
defined on the non-negative integers.
Zero, one, two and so on.
The mean of a Poisson random variable
is lambda, this parameter here.
And the variance of this
distribution is also lambda.
So that's an interesting thing to take
into account when you model things is if
they're a poisson.
The mean and
the variance have to be equal.
Which of you have repeated poisson data,
this is a checkable assumption.
I'd like to get some instances where
we use the poisson distribution.
Any time you want to model count data,
the Poisson distribution is a candidate.
Especially if those counts are unbounded.
There's also another set of
data that's very common in
the field of bio-statistics.
So called event time or survival data.
So for example, in cancer trials,
you might be trying out a new therapy.
You would model the time until people
have a recurrence of some symptoms.
Some people may not ever
have that recurrence.
And some people may,
in the time of the study.
You need special statistical
techniques to deal with that so,
that so,
that problem of so-called censoring.
And those techniques have a deep
connection with the Poisson distribution.
Whenever you take a sample of people and
you classify them according
to some characteristics, and
just look at the counts of
the people of various hair colors.
That's called a contingency table.
You can create plot,
cross classified contingency table for
example you were to count
hair color by race, and
each cell would be the specific
race hair color combination.
The count of the people in the sample
that had that specific combination.
The Poisson distribution is the devault,
default distribution for
modeling contingency table data.
And it turns out that it has again
a deep connection with some of
the other models you might think to use
such as multi nomials, binomials, and
A final instance where the poisson
is used, and this is done so
commonly it's not even really stated
as people, people are doing it.
Is in instances where you have a binomial,
but n is very large and p is very small.
This, for example, happens very
commonly in the field of epidemiology.
My friend Roger studies air pollution.
And he looks at,
as air pollution rates rise and
fall, the number of new cases of say,
respiratory diseases.
In large areas, like cities for example.
Well the n is very large,
the population of the city,
but the number of events that he's
looking at are often quite small.
And so
he models those as if they were poisson.
And this is done so commonly in the field
of epidemiology that people don't even
really say when they're doing it.
They just do it, and
everyone knows what they're talking.
The Poisson distribution is
often used to model rates.
So for example,
let's let x be Poisson lambda t.
It's important to note that
lambda here has units.
It's the average number
of events per unit time,
where t is expressed in that,
that particular time unit.
So lambda is the expected count per unit
time, and t is the total monitoring time.
So this is a very common use of the
Poisson distribution for modeling rates.
So, imagine if the number of people that
show up to a bus stop is Poisson with
a mean of 2.5 people per hour.
We watch the bus stop for four hours.
What's the probability that three or
four, three or
fewer people show up the whole time?
So that's just the Poi,
Poisson probability of three, three, two,
one, and zero.
And the rate we want at
this point is not 2.5.
Cause it's 2.5 events prior.
But we watched it for four hours.
So we want to put in
a rate of 2.5 times four.
And here we get
the probability here of 1%.
Let's talk about the Poisson
approximation to the binomial.
Particularly when n is large and
p is small.
The Poisson can be a quite accurate
approximation of the binomial.
To tie down notation,
let's let x be binomial n, p.
And define lambda as n times p.
But here we're considering circumstances
where n is very large, and
p is very small.
Then the proposal is that the probability
distribution governing acts which is
binomial can be well approximated by
Poisson probabilities with this
specific notation lambda as n times p.
As our final example to this,
to discussing the Poisson distribution.
Let's go through a Poisson
approximation of the binomial.
So imagine if we were to flip a coin
with success probability 0.01 500 times.
What's the probability of two or
fewer successes?
This is simply to illustrate that I have
a setting that's a binomial probability
with a large n, 500, and a small p, 0.01.
And now I want, but
it's, it's still in the realm where
the binomial calculations are possible.
So here when I do pbinom, for two,
because the question asked for two or
fewer successes, size equals 500,
500 coin flips, probability equals .01,
suggesting that the true success
probability of the problem.
Of the coin is .01.
I get around 12%.
When I do the same calculation with
Poisson, two and then now instead of
inputting the size and the probability, I
put in lambda as n times p 500 times .01.
I get 12, 12.5%.
So, fairly close.